Echo Chambers in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter’s
Friend Recommender System
Kayla Duskin
kduskin@uw.edu
Information School, University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
Joseph S. Schafer
Dept. of Human Centered Design and Engineering,
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
Jevin D. West
Information School, University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
Emma S. Spiro
Information School, University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
ABSTRACT
The presence of political misinformation and ideological echo cham-
bers on social media platforms is concerning given the important
role that these sites play in the public’s exposure to news and cur-
rent events. Algorithmic systems employed on these platforms are
presumed to play a role in these phenomena, but little is known
about their mechanisms and effects. In this work, we conduct an
algorithmic audit of Twitter’s Who-To-Follow friend recommenda-
tion system, the first empirical audit that investigates the impact
of this algorithm in-situ. We create automated Twitter accounts
that initially follow left and right affiliated U.S. politicians during
the 2022 U.S. midterm elections and then grow their information
networks using the platform’s recommender system. We pair the ex-
periment with an observational study of Twitter users who already
follow the same politicians. Broadly, we find that while following
the recommendation algorithm leads accounts into dense and recip-
rocal neighborhoods that structurally resemble echo chambers, the
recommender also results in less political homogeneity of a user’s
network compared to accounts growing their networks through so-
cial endorsement. Furthermore, accounts that exclusively followed
users recommended by the algorithm had fewer opportunities to en-
counter content centered on false or misleading election narratives
compared to choosing friends based on social endorsement.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Social media; Social net-
works; • Information systems →Social recommendation.
KEYWORDS
Social Media, Recommender Systems, Algorithmic Audit
ACM Reference Format:
Kayla Duskin, Joseph S. Schafer, Jevin D. West, and Emma S. Spiro. 2024.
Echo Chambers in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter’s Friend
Recommender System. In ACM Web Science Conference (Websci ’24), May
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0334-8/24/05
https://doi.org/10.1145/3614419.3643996
21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3614419.3643996
1
INTRODUCTION
Social media platforms play an increasingly important role in the
consumption and sharing of information and are now a source of
news for many [38]. Growing alongside the dependence on these
platforms for news is the recognition that they may facilitate in-
formation echo chambers, contribute to political polarization, and
exacerbate the spread of misinformation [10, 28, 37]. These issues
pose significant risk across a variety of domains, from democratic
processes to public health and well-being [30, 41]. Given the promi-
nent role of social media in information infrastructure and the
potential negative societal impacts, it is crucial to understand the
complex combination of factors – behavioral and technological –
that may exacerbate the issues found online.
One key piece of the puzzle is the underlying algorithms that
are commonplace on social media sites, from content recommenda-
tion and filtering, to serving ads, to friend suggestions. There is a
growing body of scholarly work attempting to quantify how these
algorithms alter the information ecosystem, for example exploring
how Twitter’s 1 content recommendation algorithm may distort
users’ experiences in particular ways [2–4, 9]. Interest in these algo-
rithms has only increased with Twitter’s release of source code for
both their content and friend recommendation systems in March
2023 2. While the publication of the code helps to inform the public
which factors are considered when ranking content or suggesting
friends, this does not translate into understanding how these al-
gorithms embedded in social systems shape (and are shaped by)
user experiences over time. Given that key parameters and trained
models remain unavailable, and Twitter continues to restrict access
to platform data that would allow for outside assessment of the
system, several recent articles have pointed out the limited utility
of this information [21, 34]. Thus, despite progress, there are still
vital gaps in our understanding of the impact of these recommender
systems across a variety of domains. It has yet to be empirically
shown, for example, if (and how) Twitter’s friend-recommendation
algorithm encourages political echo chambers on its platform. In
this work, we seek to address this specific gap by employing an
1For clarity given recent changes to the social media platform X, formerly known as
Twitter, we use the name and terms associated with the site during the time of the
study including terms such as tweet, retweet, and follow.
2https://blog.twitter.com/engineering/en_us/topics/open-source/2023/twitter-
recommendation-algorithm
1
arXiv:2404.06422v1  [cs.SI]  9 Apr 2024


Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Kayla Duskin, Joseph S. Schafer, Jevin D. West, and Emma S. Spiro
algorithmic audit of Twitter’s Who-To-Follow suggestions in order
to answer the following questions:
RQ1: How, if at all, does the friend recommendation algo-
rithm impact the structural qualities of personal networks
of those who use it?
RQ2: Does the friend recommendation algorithm impact the
partisan makeup of resulting personal networks?
RQ3: Does use of friend recommendations play a role in the
amount of false and misleading content to which a user is
potentially exposed?
We concentrate this study on political polarization and false and
misleading election-related content in the United States, running
an experiment on the Twitter platform to coincide with the 2022
U.S. Midterm Elections. In this paper, we make the following main
contributions:
(1) We describe the design and implementation of the first algo-
rithmic audit of Twitter’s Who-To-Follow algorithm using
automated accounts that mimic a user building a friendship
network.
(2) We collect and analyze a unique, longitudinal data set of each
account’s evolving social network and the content they could
have encountered through the social relationships, as well
as observational data of comparable real Twitter users. The
data includes 1,331,258 tweets from 7,693 unique followed
users as part of the audit experiment and 928 users as part of
the observational study along with 52,489,602 tweets posted
by their friends
(3) We present empirical findings that indicate that Twitter’s
friend recommendation algorithm results in less polarized
networks than those observed on the platform and when
compared to social endorsement based strategies for forming
new connections (e.g. following those who existing friends
retweet). This result has important implications for under-
standing the role of social algorithms in both facilitating
political polarization and potentially reducing its effects.
2
BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
This work employs an algorithmic audit of Twitter’s friend recom-
mendation system to identify how its features may (or may not)
result in a networked informational environment that resembles
a political echo chamber. Here, we provide a general overview of
prior studies of online echo chambers and polarization; we then
introduce algorithmic auditing as a research design, and finally,
we focus on recommender systems and the role they may play in
polarization and misinformation in online settings. These domains
of study inform our work which is, to our knowledge, the first
empirical audit investigating the impact of Twitter’s friend recom-
mendation algorithm on echo chambers and encounters with false
and misleading information within the platform.
2.1
Echo Chambers and Political Polarization
The metaphor of an echo chamber refers to a group of individuals
who share the same opinions or world view and repeat (or echo)
those homogeneous views within the group, thus reinforcing their
shared pre-existing beliefs (or in some cases pushing beliefs to
be even more extreme) [20]. A widely held concern is that echo
chambers may lead to divergence of public opinion and increase
political polarization [46].
Echo chambers are most often identified through both their struc-
tural properties (e.g. density and transitivity of social ties, network
homophily in regards to identity or opinion) as well as through
the ideological homogeneity of their members (e.g. similarity of
content shared within a group, degree of difference between dis-
tinct groups). Many studies on digital trace data have used these
methods to characterize ideological echo chambers on a variety
of social media platforms, especially in regard to politics [10, 18],
their relationship to online political polarization [12, 17, 19, 29]
and the spread of misinformation [13, 32]. Observational studies
have largely found that users end up largely segregated into com-
munities centered on homogeneous opinions [47]. That said, there
are studies and reports that argue for a tempered interpretation of
echo chambers, saying they are less prevalent than often assumed
[15, 22].
A related but distinct concept is a filter bubble, which is used
to describe how a user’s exposure to ideologically homogeneous
content is influenced by algorithmic systems that filter and suggest
content for the user [36]. Echo chambers may exist for a variety
of reasons, including psychological phenomena such as confirma-
tion bias or selective exposure; filter bubbles are one potential
contributing factor to their existence. However, the link between
echo chambers and filter bubbles is not fully understood. In fact, at
least on YouTube, it appears that algorithmically suggested content
is not the primary driver of the consumption of extreme content
[8, 24, 39].
2.2
Algorithmic Auditing
Algorithmic audits seek to uncover the potential negative impacts
of computer algorithms by observing input and outputs to the
system [42], and are particularly useful when the details of the
system implementation are hidden from the researcher – as they
are for most social media recommender systems. To gain insight
into an algorithm’s impact on users, scholars have used automated
agents, or sock-puppet audits, to simulate a human’s experience
interacting with the system under study [14].
Several audits using automated accounts have taken place on
Twitter, including a study that found that the initial selection of
friends impacts the density, transitivity, and political homogeneity
of an account’s personal network but found no consistent evidence
of political bias in the chronological news feed [9]. Bandy and Di-
akopoulos [2] found that Twitter’s algorithmically curated "Home
Timeline" increases links to external sites and increases source di-
versity while potentially increasing the disparity in partisan differ-
ences when compared to the reverse chronological feed. In contrast,
Bartley et al. [4] found that Twitter’s algorithmic timeline increases
inequality in exposure to friends’ tweets.
Motivated by concerns of “rabbit holes" that lead to increasingly
fringe content, YouTube’s recommendation algorithm has also been
the topic of debate and study. Through a study using automated
accounts, Brown et al. [6] found that YouTube’s recommendation al-
gorithm pushes users into mild political echo chambers, and biases
toward moderately conservative content. Several studies [25, 35]
confirm YouTube’s filter bubble effect, where watching videos that
2


Echo Chambers in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter’s Friend Recommender System
Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Democratic 
Candidate 
Senate Race
Republican 
Candidate 
Data Collection
seen on timeline
recommended 
by Twitter
Account Creation
Network growth
Recommender
System Growth
Social 
Endorsement 
Growth
Recommender
System Growth
Social 
Endorsement 
Growth
Observational Study
Comparison 
Accounts
Comparison 
Accounts
following
following
Figure 1: Audit accounts were created in matched pairs to compare network growth strategies where both accounts initially
followed a single U.S. politician (seed account) running for office during the 2022 midterms. Seed accounts were chosen as the
Democratic and Republican candidates from five Senate races. Across the five Senate races, 20 accounts were created in the
audit (two candidates per race, two audit accounts per candidate).
promote misinformation triggers recommendations for similarly
misinformative content. Similarly, it has been shown that YouTube’s
recommendations direct right-leaning users into increasingly radi-
cal content [23].
2.3
Recommendation Systems and Echo
Chambers
Friend recommendation systems, where an algorithmic system sug-
gests accounts that a user may be interested in connecting with, are
now ubiquitous across social media platforms. When it was intro-
duced in 2010, Twitter’s "Who to Follow" friend recommendation
algorithm increased follower counts across all users, but resulted in
a larger boost for already popular accounts [45]. Work to understand
how this system may impact polarization or exposure to false and
misleading information has so far been limited to simulations. One
such simulation found that recommenders that connect structurally
similar nodes (those that already share neighbors) result in network
topology that enables opinion polarization [43]. Through an analy-
sis of five recommendation algorithms on a synthetic network, Fer-
rara et al. [16] found that these systems have the potential to reduce
the visibility of minority groups in bi-populated networks. Cinus et
al. [11] found that friend-recommenders can significantly contribute
to echo chambers, but only if the initial network is sufficiently ho-
mophilous. Using a data set of COVID-19 related misinformation,
Tommasel and Menczer [48] found that friend recommendation al-
gorithms that prioritize diversity of connections recommend more
misinformation-spreaders and that effect of the recommendation
algorithm is greater when misinformation-spreaders are already
well connected within the network. The simulation-based research
summarized above provides valuable insight into how friend rec-
ommenders have the potential for impact on misinformation and
ideological polarization, however the function and impact of these
systems – as they exist in the wild – is understudied.
3
DATA AND METHODS
The audit described in this study, and concurrent data collection,
was designed to probe the impact of Twitter’s friend recommen-
dations on both the characteristics of the followed accounts and
the content those accounts produce through the use of automated
accounts. The resulting data set, as such, encompasses timestamped
observations of networks (i.e. the accounts followed), the character-
istics of these social contacts, as well as the content produced. We
pair the data collected on the automated accounts with an observa-
tional study of comparable accounts already existing on Twitter. In
this section, we review the platform under investigation, present
the audit design and implementation, and discuss the resulting data
and the methods used to estimate key features from the data, includ-
ing identifying false and misleading content in posts and estimating
account partisanship. This study was reviewed the by the Univer-
sity of Washington Human Subjects Division and determined not
to involve human subjects. Therefore, review and approval by the
IRB was not required.
3.1
Platform Overview
This work was conducted on Twitter from September through
December 2022. The choice of platform was motivated by three
primary factors: (1) its nearly ubiquitous use in political discourse
online, (2) its reliance on algorithmically determined recommen-
dations of social relationships, and (3) its ease of access in terms
of data collection (at the time of this study). Twitter’s model of
offering both suggestions for new connections is common practice
across many popular social media platforms and, therefore, can be
viewed as illustrative of systems of this kind. We recognize that
social media platform affordances and algorithmic choices are not
fixed, but rather ever-evolving. Thus, while the data collection pe-
riod for this study preceded a known phase of volatility of Twitter’s
algorithmic recommendation system [40], this work is limited to
the platform as it existed during the observation period. In offering
a detailed snapshot of one social media platform, our hope is that
3


Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Kayla Duskin, Joseph S. Schafer, Jevin D. West, and Emma S. Spiro
the results can provide insight into algorithmic effects on other
platforms.
3.2
Audit Design and Implementation
To reveal qualities of an otherwise opaque algorithmic system, it
is useful to mimic how a human might engage with that system
[14]. We choose to employ this approach for our study because,
while simulation studies conducted on synthetic or samples of data
have probed similar research questions, an algorithmic audit can
reveal the outcomes of the real system as a whole as it operates on
the massive underlying network of the platform. In this study, we
seek to isolate the influence of algorithmic recommendations by
creating automated accounts (hereafter referred to as audit accounts)
that navigate Twitter according to predetermined protocols. The
audit consisted of three stages: account creation, network growth,
and content collection (depicted in Figure 1). To accomplish this
work, we used Selenium3 and Python to schedule daily actions for
each account and collected account metadata and content through
Twitter’s academic API.
3.2.1
Audit Account Creation. We created twenty Twitter accounts
and initiated each as if it were a new user of the platform interested
initially in a single candidate running for U.S. Senate, which we refer
to as the seed candidate; in other words each new account enters
the system and forms a connection to a single existing account
of interest. We chose five U.S. Senate races out of the ten races
predicted to be the closest on the 2022 Senate Election Forecast
published by the popular and widely recognized FiveThirtyEight
blog4. For each Senate race, we created four unique accounts – two
which initially followed the Republican candidate and two initially
following the Democratic candidate.
The audit accounts were then assigned to one of two condi-
tions to grow connections over time. The first pair (i.e. Demo-
cratic/Republican seeds) of accounts followed a network growth
protocol based on the friend recommender system, where network
ties are added based on Twitter suggestions. We refer to these
audit accounts as recommender-system (RS) audit accounts. The
purpose of the RS audit accounts is to demonstrate networks cre-
ated solely by relying on the friend recommendation algorithm
to add new connections. To put those results in context, we also
create a set of accounts that ignore the friend recommendation
algorithm and instead grow their networks based on the implicit
recommendations of existing friends, similarly to how Chen et
al. [9] grow the networks of their neutral drifter bots. This other
network growth protocol selects new accounts to follow based on
social-endorsement, where connections were added to accounts
retweeted by existing connections. We refer to these accounts as
social-endorsement (SE) audit accounts. The two network growth
protocols are discussed in more detail in the following section. A
schema of the account creation, across races and network growth
conditions, is shown in Figure 1.
To avoid unintentional influence on Twitter recommendation
algorithms, as well as the actions of other accounts in the Twitter
ecosystem, the audit accounts were given nondescript names and
opted out of selecting any “interests" when prompted at the time
3https://selenium-python.readthedocs.io/
4https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2022-election-forecast/senate/
of creation. Additionally, profile descriptions, photos, and banners
were left blank to avoid any amount of deception or influence on
how others may perceive the account.
3.2.2
Network Growth. Once created, each audit account entered a
network growth phase, following a set of specific steps depending
on the assigned network growth protocol. This phase began on
September 21, 2022 and continued for each account until it reached
a predetermined threshold for the number of friends. This threshold
was chosen based on matching the median number of friends in the
networks of the corresponding comparison groups (See Section 3.3).
Audit accounts were in the network growth phase for three to eight
weeks, depending on their stopping conditions.
Recommender-system (RS) network growth: RS accounts logged on
twice per day, approximately 12 hours apart starting at 6:00 am PST.
The RS audit account then followed all users that were suggested in
the "Who to Follow" window on Twitter’s home page. Typically this
consisted of two to three accounts and this process was done twice
during each session by following all accounts suggested on the
home page and then refreshing the page and repeating the process,
meaning that four to six new accounts were followed twice per day.
Promoted accounts were ignored during this process.
Social-endorsement (SE) network growth: SE accounts also conducted
a series of following actions twice per day, approximately 12 hours
apart starting at 6:00 am PST. In this condition, the 200 most recent
tweets from the audit account’s friends were collected using the
Twitter API’s home timeline call. We considered all users that had
been retweeted by an audit account’s friends as potential new
friends, and randomly selected six accounts to follow, weighted by
how often that account appeared (i.e., was retweeted) in the most
recent 200 tweets.
3.2.3
Account Behavior. Throughout the duration of the study, the
audit accounts did not tweet, like, quote, retweet content or other-
wise engage with existing accounts in any way other than following
them. We deploy the audit accounts as passive consumers, rather
than as creators, of content for several key reasons. First, it has
been shown that activity on the platform is highly skewed, with
the top (i.e. most active) 25% of users producing 97% of posts [31].
Importantly, the bottom 75% of users produce a median of 0 posts
(including original tweets, retweets, and replies) per month [31],
making inactivity the norm that we aim to replicate. Second, we
consider the risk of amplifying harmful content or deceiving other
users on the platform to be too great to justify content engagement.
Given the context of the 2022 US midterm elections, programming
the audit accounts to retweet or like popular or recent tweets from
their timeline (as in [9]), could have inadvertently led to sharing
or boosting the prominence of misleading election information
during a critical time period, an outcome antithetical to our work.
Withholding from engagement actions fixes this input to the rec-
ommendation algorithm across all of the audit accounts while other
aspects (e.g. the local network of each audit account) vary.
3.2.4
Data collection. Network Observation: We recorded the fol-
lowing actions for each audit account, noting which accounts were
followed and when. This creates a time-stamped record of the net-
work growth of each audit account. Additionally, to get the full
picture of each audit account’s social neighborhood, we used the
4


Echo Chambers in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter’s Friend Recommender System
Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Table 1: Mean values for each statistic described in Section 4.1. The first five measurements are aggregated to form a representative
metric for each audit account’s personal network, then we take the mean across each group. Remaining measurements produce
a single value per account network and the mean across each group is reported here. Unreported measurements in the are due
to the lack of complete data to measure the network structural properties of the comparison accounts.
Seed Candidate Party
Democrat
Republican
Group
Recommender
Social
Comparison
Recommender
Social
Comparison
median friends
9222.00
1867.40
1668.34
6782.40
2742.20
1153.18
median followers
396325.88
21868.60
420799.92
232321.10
29193.70
252467.15
median account age (years)
6.76
9.39
10.88
8.21
7.99
10.65
median tweets per year
2400.94
4416.42
1478.38
1919.57
5228.45
1430.82
mean percent verified
31.38
30.43
52.13
36.67
30.55
50.93
E-I Index
0.31
-0.02
0.07
0.61
-0.58
0.15
density
0.18
0.07
-
0.19
0.13
-
reciprocity
0.77
0.61
-
0.72
0.61
-
connected components (weak)
14.00
25.80
-
17.80
31.20
-
connected components (strong)
43.25
87.60
-
47.20
75.20
-
Twitter API to collect metadata about each followed account (e.g.
the age of the account, whether they were considered to be a veri-
fied user, how many friend and followers they have) as well as each
followed account’s outgoing social ties (e.g. their friends).
Content Collection: Overlapping with the period of network growth,
we collected content for each audit account. To collect all tweets
that an account could have been exposed to, we used the Twitter
API to archive all tweets posted by all of the audit account’s friends
at regular intervals. This archival process ran approximately every
three days for the duration of the content collection period and
resulted in 1,322,414 unique tweets during the period of interest.
3.3
Observational Study
To establish a baseline for what the personal network of a typical
follower of each seed candidate might look like, we defined a com-
parison group of existing Twitter users for each seed candidate.
For each of the political candidate seed accounts, a group of 100
users were randomly sampled from their most recent 2000 follow-
ers. After sampling, some accounts were deleted, suspended, or
made private resulting in a group of 928 users split into 10 groups
(five Senate races with two candidates each) by seed account that
serve as a comparison sample of real followers of the political seed
candidates. We calculated the median number of friends of each
comparison group and used this as the stopping condition for build-
ing the audit accounts’ networks. That is, we stopped growing the
audit account’s network when it reached the median network size
of the corresponding comparison group. For each of these followers,
we used the Twitter API to collect a snapshot of their personal net-
work (i.e. all of the accounts they are following). Once we identified
all of the friends of each comparison account, we retrieved account
metadata for each friend account. We also collected the content that
comparison accounts were potentially exposed to by retrieving all
tweets posted by the comparison accounts’ friends. We limit this to
a six day period surrounding the midterm election date (November
6th through November 12th) due to the large amount of data this
produced. This resulted in a set of 52,489,602 unique tweets.
3.4
False and Misleading Content
We enrich the data described above to understand the prevalence
of tweets pertaining to false and misleading election narratives.
Three of the authors were involved in a real-time, multi-institution
collaboration to monitor and analyze rumors and misinformation
about the 2022 U.S. midterm election through the Election Integrity
Partnership5. This process involved active monitoring of election-
related content across multiple platform to identify emerging un-
proven claims as they gained popularity online. Once identified, a
team of researchers used quantitative assessment of Twitter data
(provided by keyword queries using Twitter’s V1 streaming API)
and qualitative assessment of claims and relevant media (news arti-
cles, fact-checks, press releases, etc.) to determine the legitimacy
of claims and define the key narratives present. The outcome of
this work is a curated set of election-related incidents that contain
false or misleading information as well as corresponding keyword-
based queries crafted to identify tweets related to each incident in
a process similar to [26]. The data has been made publicly available
[44] and a manuscript further detailing this dataset is in progress
at the time of publication. The scope of these incidents and data is
narrow – consisting of false, misleading, or unsubstantiated claims
related to attempts to suppress voting, reduce election participation,
confuse voters, or delegitimize election results without evidence.
We cross-reference the tweets posted by the friends of the audit
accounts and comparison accounts with the dataset of election ru-
mors, thus identifying a subset of the tweets that each account had
the potential to see that pertain to false or misleading election nar-
ratives; during the time period of interest (November 6th through
November 12th), we identify 187,689 such tweets.
3.5
Account Partisanship
To approximate the political partisanship of each audit account’s
personal network, we make use of an exogenous data set to iden-
tify left and right wing political influencers and then label friend
accounts within our data set based on how frequently they retweet
5https://www.eipartnership.net/
5


Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Kayla Duskin, Joseph S. Schafer, Jevin D. West, and Emma S. Spiro
the identified influencers. To do this we make use of a collection
of approximately 217 million tweets mentioning English-language
terms related to the midterm election, such as ‘election’ and ‘vote,’;
these data capture a broad sample of election-related Twitter con-
versations and were made available though the election monitoring
project introduced in section 3.4. These posts were then processed
using a coengagement network approach [5], to find communities
of accounts that could be considered political influencers based on
the size of their engaged audience. Through community detection
and qualitative analysis of the content they share, two distinct sets
of influencers – one left-leaning, one right-leaning – are identified
for a combined total of 6,721 users.
We then use a form of label propagation to assign labels to the
users within the audit data set (e.g. the accounts followed by the
audit accounts or followed by the comparison accounts). For each
account within our data set, we consider the proportion of their
election-related retweets that are left or right leaning influencers.
If 80% or more of their retweets are from one of the two parties, the
account receives the corresponding partisan label. For example, if
an account in our data set retweeted right-leaning influencers nine
times and left-leaning influencers one time, it would have a partisan
score of 90% right-leaning and be assigned a right-leaning label.
If an account either does not retweet political content or retweets
left and right wing influencers relatively equally (retweets each
party less than 80% of the time), the account receives a neutral
label. The 80% threshold was validated through qualitative analysis
where two of the authors qualitatively coded samples of 50 random
tweets from each group and verified that for the left and right-
leaning groups, all political tweets matched the assigned party and
the majority of tweets were political tweets while for the neutral
group the majority of tweets were apolitical or non-partisan. We
found that this method allowed us to label a comparable percentage
of users to other common partisanship-labeling methods such as
hashtag-based or link-based classification with the benefit that even
users who do not share links or hashtags can be labeled based on
their retweets.
3.6
Measuring Echo Chambers
As discussed in 2.1, echo chambers are identified using both net-
work measurements and analysis of ideological homogeneity. We
construct personal social networks where each node is an account
and each directed edge indicates a following relationship for each
audit account and comparison account. We measure structural net-
work properties, such as density and reciprocity and the number of
strong and weak connected components in the network. Since the
edges formed by our audit accounts are artifacts of the study, we re-
move them before computing these statistics. In terms of analyzing
ideological uniformity, we utilize the account-level partisanship
labels and tweet-level misinformation labels to quantify the politi-
cal homogeneity and quality of information experienced by each
account.
3.7
Challenges
As expected, we encountered several challenges in deploying auto-
mated accounts. First, we were limited in the number of accounts
we could create due to the difficulty in authenticating many unique
Figure 2: Network measurements of the audit accounts’ per-
sonal networks, grouped by network growth method and
seed party. A) Density B) Reciprocity C) Number of strongly
connected components after removing the ego node D) Num-
ber of weakly connected components after removing the
ego node. Error bars represent the standard error (n=5 audit
account networks in each group except the Democratic Algo-
rithmic group where n=4).
accounts. We therefore limited the study to twenty automated ac-
counts (this is above or on par with similar studies, see e.g. [2, 4, 9]).
Second, during the phase of network growth, some of the accounts
were subject to temporary or permanent freezes on adding new
friends due to inadvertently triggering Twitter’s moderation poli-
cies. In these cases, we resumed network growth as soon as possible,
but as a result there is non-uniform network growth across the auto-
mated accounts. Finally, one of the twenty accounts was suspended
during the process and were unable to be reinstated, resulting in
incomplete data for those accounts.
4
RESULTS
Overall, we find that following Twitter’s friend recommendation
algorithm results in networks that differ from both comparison
accounts and from networks created through social endorsement-
based growth. Where possible, we compare all three groups to put
the RS audit accounts in full context by comparing to both “in-
the-wild" Twitter users and to the SE audit accounts that match
the RS accounts in terms of their age and general behavior but
follow accounts endorsed by their friends. Specifically, we find that
utilizing the friend recommender system results in accounts whose
personal networks structurally resemble echo chambers (RQ1) but
are less politically homogeneous (RQ2) and share less content linked
to false and misleading election narratives (RQ3), compared to other
groups.
6


Echo Chambers in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter’s Friend Recommender System
Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Figure 3: Characteristics of the accounts followed by the audit
accounts, grouped by network growth method and seed party.
A) Median number of friends B) Median number of followers
C) Median account age in years D) Percent of accounts that are
verified by Twitter. Error bars represent show the standard
error (n=5 audit account networks in each group except the
Democratic Algorithmic group where n=4).
4.1
Comparing Personal Networks (RQ1)
We first describe the structural features and characteristics of neigh-
bors present in the resulting personal networks of the audit ac-
counts, comparing across experimental conditions and to the com-
parison group. These results are illustrated in Figure 2 and the
descriptive statistics for each group are in Table 1. Structurally
we find that recommender-system (RS) accounts end up in highly
connected neighborhoods when compared to social-endorsement
(SE) accounts. The personal networks of the RS accounts are more
dense and more reciprocal than the SE networks. The networks are
also less fragmented, as measured by the number of connected com-
ponents present in the network after removing the ego node (the
audit account). RS accounts’ personal networks had fewer strongly
connected components and weakly connected components com-
pared to the networks of the SE accounts. We see these patterns
across both political parties.
We also look at the characteristics of the accounts followed by
each of the audit accounts and compare them to accounts followed
by comparison accounts, as shown in Figure 3. We find that the
RS accounts follow users that are more popular (i.e. have more
followers) when compared to SE accounts but are about equal
with comparison group. The RS accounts also follow users who
have more friends (out-going ties) compared to the SE accounts
and comparison groups. In contrast, the Twitter users from the
comparison groups follow a higher percentage of verified accounts
than either the RS accounts or SE accounts. Comparison accounts
followed older accounts on average than either RS or SE accounts.
4.2
Political Homogeneity (RQ2)
We analyze the partisanship make up of each audit account’s neigh-
borhood using the labels described in Section 3.5. We find that
the networks of SE accounts display the highest level of politi-
cal homogeneity, aligning with the party of the seed account –
and that this effect was stronger on the right than on the left as
shown in Figure 4. All of the SE accounts seeded with Republican
candidates resulted in personal networks that were dominated by
right-leaning accounts, with a mean of 78.91% of their neighbors
identified as right-leaning. Democrat-seeded SE accounts ended up
with a mean of 51.23% left-leaning friends. In contrast, the friend
recommendation algorithm resulted in the most politically diverse
networks, especially for accounts seeded with a Republican can-
didate. Republican-seeded RS accounts resulted in an average of
only 19.63% right-leaning friends, while for left-seeded RS accounts
40.53% of their final network neighbors were left-leaning. The base-
line comparison groups showed less variance across candidates in
terms of their political makeup and fell between the RS and SE
networks in terms of homogeneity, with the baseline comparison
groups for Republican candidates averaging 42.52% right-leaning
friends while for the comparison groups for Democratic candidates
averaged 46.69% left-leaning friends. We calculate the Krackhardt
EI-Index [27] as a measurement of the comparative frequency of
external (inter-party) and internal (intra-party) ties for each ego net-
work and find that the RS accounts have networks exhibiting higher
EI-Index values, indicating greater proportions of cross-party ties
(see Table 1)
We conducted a temporal analysis of partisanship to asses how
each audit account’s network neighborhood evolved over time. In
most cases, the algorithmic recommendations pulled both left and
right seeded accounts away from their baseline party and toward a
more ideologically balanced personal network over time (shown in
Figure 5). This effect appears to be stronger for accounts initiated
by following a Republican candidate, with two of the audit accounts
eventually following more left-leaning than right-leaning accounts.
Networks grown through social endorsement tell a different story.
While all SE networks moved toward neutrality initially, the right-
seeded SE accounts uniformly ended with a strong majority of
right-leaning friends.
4.3
Potential Exposure to False and Misleading
Content (RQ3)
Figure 6 shows striking partisan differences in the volume of tweets
about false or misleading narratives potentially seen by each group.
We compute the number of tweets posted by each account’s friends
during the week of the midterm election that are identified as
pertaining to a false or misleading election-related narrative (see
3.4). We normalize by the total number of tweets each account had
the potential to see (the total tweets posted by the accounts they
were following) since the number of friends and friend activity
level varies. Overall, tweets relating to misleading election content
made up only a small portion of potentially viewed tweets. The RS
accounts had the lowest potential exposure to misleading narratives.
On average, each of the RS accounts was potentially exposed to
44.5 tweets, or 0.076% of tweets for Democrat-seeded accounts
and 102.4 tweets or 0.21% for Republican-seeded accounts. The SE
7


Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Kayla Duskin, Joseph S. Schafer, Jevin D. West, and Emma S. Spiro
Figure 4: Political makeup of the of the personal network
of each audit account (columns 1, 2, 4, and 5) and each com-
parison group (columns 3 and 6). Users are classified as left-
leaning (blue), right-leaning (red) or neutral (orange) as de-
scribed in section 3.5
Democrat-seeded accounts were exposed to 66.6 tweets or 0.065%,
which is similar to the Democrat-seeded RS accounts. However,
Republican-seeded SE accounts had the potential to see significantly
more misleading content than their RS counterparts – 1439.4 tweets
or 0.74%. The comparison groups for Democratic candidates were
exposed to 342.0 tweets on average or 0.11% while the comparison
groups for Republican candidates were exposed to 1174 tweets on
average, or 0.62%.
In all three groups (RS, SE, and comparison) Democrat-seeded ac-
counts were exposed to fewer tweets about false or misleading nar-
ratives. For Democrat-seeded accounts, the form of network growth
makes little difference while for Republican-seeded accounts there
are clear differences between the RS, SE and comparison groups.
For Republican-seeded accounts, the potential exposure of all of
the RS accounts fell below the median of the comparison group
while all of the SE accounts fell above the median.
5
DISCUSSION
Measuring Echo Chambers
The results of this audit study confirm previous work that has found
that early choices in following relationships impact many aspects
of a user’s experience on a platform [2, 9]. We find that Twitter’s
friend recommendation algorithm leads the automated accounts to
neighborhoods that are dense and reciprocal, structurally fitting
the criteria often used to define echo chambers. However, analysis
of ideological partisanship shows that the friend recommendation
algorithm leads to less political homogeneity within the neighbor-
hood than both the comparison group and networks grown through
social endorsement. Structural and ideological echo chambers are
Figure 5: The average partisanship over time of each audit
account’s set of friends. Left leaning accounts are assigned
the value of -1, neutral or apolitical accounts have a value of
0 and right leaning accounts have a value of 1.
not synonymous. This study highlights a need to distinguish be-
tween structural and homogeneity-based criteria across research
interested in quantifying echo chambers and their impacts online.
Amplification Paradox
Researchers have noted that while recommendation systems surely
impact user actions, in isolation they do not explain interaction
with extreme content [8, 24, 39]. These studies focus on content-
recommendation on YouTube but we find congruent results for the
friend recommendation algorithm on Twitter.
We find that neither the purely recommender system driven nor
social-endorsement based strategies of network growth create net-
works that perfectly match the comparison Twitter users’ personal
networks. The comparison groups more closely resemble the RS
networks in terms of the popularity of the alters but is more similar
to the SE grown networks in terms of the number of friends the
alters have. Measures of frequency of verification, activity level, and
partisanship all differ between the three groups compared here. In
terms of network homogeneity and exposure to false and mislead-
ing narratives, the comparison groups fall between the values of the
RS and SE networks. This could suggest that while the algorithm
plays a role in shaping personal networks, the interaction between
algorithmic suggestion and user choice is imperative in explaining
echo chambers observed online, aligning with [39].
We observe that the strongest partisan echo chambers result
from Republican-seeded audit accounts that grew their networks
8


Echo Chambers in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter’s Friend Recommender System
Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Figure 6: Prevalence of tweets about false or misleading elec-
tion narratives as a percentage of total tweets an account
had the potential to be exposed to (all tweets posted by their
friends) during the week of the election.
through social-endorsement. These accounts had the least ideo-
logically diverse neighborhoods and saw the most tweets about
false or misleading election narratives. The Republican compari-
son groups had similarly high exposure to questionable election
narratives. These differences across political parties are consistent
with previous work demonstrating that right leaning users were
more likely to engage with misinformation online [26, 33]. For the
Republican-seeded accounts, the friend recommendation system
seems to mitigate potential exposure to those narratives and, for
both left- and right-seeded accounts, produces less politically ho-
mogeneous networks. This seems to indicate that the algorithm
on its own is not the key driver of the echo chambers that other
research has shown exist on platforms.
Implications
The results of this work contribute to understanding what the
outcomes of the recommendation system are but cannot illumi-
nate how they achieve these outcomes or why they were designed
this way. The comparatively more diverse information ecosystems
created by the recommender may be due to purposeful design
choices or they may merely be artifacts of an algorithm optimized
for other outcomes. It is reasonable to assume that Twitter, along
with other social media platforms, optimizes for user engagement
and revenue from advertisement exposure when designing these
algorithms. This paper provides a roadmap for validating whether
those outcomes are compatible with promoting healthy information
environments.
Limitations
A primary limitation of this study is the limited number of auto-
mated accounts. Previous audit studies have outlined the difficulty
of conducting audit studies, including the logistics in creating ac-
counts, challenges in data collection due to the volatility of HTML
pages, and the ethical considerations of creating many accounts
[2, 4, 9]. Additionally, we initialized each audit account with a single
friend when in reality it is likely that the first several friends have a
strong influence on what is recommended. The stochastic choices at
the beginning of the process potentially had an impact on the final
resulting network. These early random choices may explain some
of the more counter-intuitive results, such as the Republican-seeded
accounts that ended up with majority left-leaning friends or the
two Democrat-seeded accounts that ended up with few left-leaning
friends.
Another limitation is that the audit accounts did not post con-
tent, engage with content, or attract followers the way a real user
might. As pointed out in [39], the interaction between algorithmic
suggestion and user choice is non-negligible and limits the general-
izability of studies such as ours, which isolate the algorithm from
other factors. We encourage future studies that assess the impact
of engagement choices on recommendation systems.
We also consider the fact that this study offers only a snap-
shot of the algorithms and platform as they stood during October
and November of 2022. Since that time there have been notable
changes in the user-base, content recommendation algorithm, and
availability of data on Twitter [1, 7, 40]. At the current moment
the study described here is not replicable due to changes in Twit-
ter’s API, which is a hurdle that the community of social media
researchers are still navigating. We also consider a relatively narrow
case study of the U.S. 2022 midterm elections. While the findings of
this work may not translate directly to other platforms or contexts,
the methodologies developed and presented in this paper offer a
starting point for future work across diverse contexts. Furthermore,
the results presented here offer a baseline from which changes to
the recommendation system can be measured.
6
CONCLUSION
In this study, we paired the use of automated accounts with obser-
vational data to conduct an algorithmic audit of Twitter’s friend
recommendation algorithm in the context of US politics and politi-
cal polarization. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first empirical
audit, not a simulation, of friend recommenders on Twitter. We ex-
amined how the recommendation algorithm impacts the structural
qualities, partisan makeup, and potential exposure to misinforma-
tion for users new to the platform during the 2022 US midterm
elections. Our findings indicate that the friend recommendation
algorithm leads accounts to densely connected neighborhoods that
are less politically focused and more ideologically diverse than
when networks are grown through social endorsement. Further-
more, accounts recommended by the algorithm are less likely to
share content about false and misleading election narratives. These
insights indicate that Twitter’s friend recommendation algorithm
alone is not the key contributor to the political echo chambers that
have been shown to exist on the platform. These findings highlight
the pressing need to understand the contributing social factors to
9


Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
Kayla Duskin, Joseph S. Schafer, Jevin D. West, and Emma S. Spiro
online echo chambers, particularly those on social media platforms,
and how those social factors interact with algorithmic decisions to
create unreliable online environments.
Ethical statement.
While designing and executing this study, considerations were
taken to minimize potential harm, deception, or unintended impact.
First, we choose to have the automated accounts be passive ob-
servers and took care not to impersonate real users. Each account
was given a nondescript name, lacked a profile photo, and had an
empty bio. The accounts never tweeted, retweeted, or otherwise
shared content; they did not privately message or otherwise engage
with any user on the platform outside of following accounts. The ac-
counts also followed a maximum of 12 accounts each day, growing
their network over time rather than all at once. These actions are
in line with Twitter’s guidelines on automated accounts including
rules against spamming or misleading users, or following accounts
in a "bulk, aggressive, or indiscriminate" manner 6. Additionally,
given that political affiliation is potentially sensitive information,
we perform only aggregate analysis of engagement with political
content and make no attempt to link users to offline behavior such
as voting records, consistent with Twitter’s terms of service 7
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding for this work has come from the University of Washing-
ton’s Center for an Informed Public, the John S. and James L. Knight
Foundation (G-2019-58788), the William and Flora Hewlett Foun-
dation (2022-00952-GRA), the Election Trust Initiative, and the
National Science Foundation (grant #2120496) as well as NSF Grad-
uate Research Fellowships under Grant No DGE-2140004, for both
Joseph S. Schafer and Kayla Duskin. Any opinions, findings, conclu-
sions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation or other funders.
The authors would like to acknowledge Prerna Juneja for feed-
back and advice regarding algorithmic audits, Prerna Sheokand for
help with data analysis ideation, as well as Lia Bozarth and Alex
Loddengaard for their technical support.
REFERENCES
[1] Joy Anyanwu and Rashawn Ray. 2022. Why is Elon Musk’s Twitter takeover in-
creasing hate speech? https://www.brookings.edu/articles/why-is-elon-musks-
twitter-takeover-increasing-hate-speech/
[2] Jack Bandy and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2021. More Accounts, Fewer Links: How
Algorithmic Curation Impacts Media Exposure in Twitter Timelines. Proc. ACM
Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW1 (April 2021), 1–28.
[3] Jack Bandy and Tomo Lazovich. 2022. Exposure to Marginally Abusive Content
on Twitter. (Jul 2022). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4175612
[4] Nathan Bartley, Andres Abeliuk, Emilio Ferrara, and Kristina Lerman. 2021.
Auditing Algorithmic Bias on Twitter. In 13th ACM Web Science Conference
2021 (Virtual Event, United Kingdom) (WebSci ’21). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 65–73.
[5] Andrew Beers, Joseph S. Schafer, Ian Kennedy, Morgan Wack, Emma S. Spiro, and
Kate Starbird. 2023. Followback clusters, satellite audiences, and bridge nodes:
Coengagement networks for the 2020 US election. Proceedings of the International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 17 (Jun 2023), 59–71.
[6] Megan A Brown, James Bisbee, Angela Lai, Richard Bonneau, Jonathan Nagler,
and Joshua A Tucker. 2022. Echo Chambers, Rabbit Holes, and Algorithmic Bias:
How YouTube Recommends Content to Real Users. (May 2022).
6https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/twitter-automation
7https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/more-on-restricted-use-cases
[7] Charlotte H. Chang, Nikhil R. Deshmukh, Paul R. Armsworth, and Yuta J. Masuda.
2023. Environmental users abandoned Twitter after Musk takeover. Trends in
ecology and evolution 38, 10 (Oct 2023), 893–895.
[8] Annie Y Chen, Brendan Nyhan, Jason Reifler, Ronald E Robertson, and Christo
Wilson. 2022. Subscriptions and external links help drive resentful users to
alternative and extremist YouTube videos. (April 2022). arXiv:2204.10921 [cs.SI]
[9] Wen Chen, Diogo Pacheco, Kai-Cheng Yang, and Filippo Menczer. 2021. Neutral
bots probe political bias on social media. Nat. Commun. 12, 1 (Sept. 2021), 5580.
[10] Matteo Cinelli, Gianmarco De Francisci Morales, Alessandro Galeazzi, Walter
Quattrociocchi, and Michele Starnini. 2021. The echo chamber effect on social
media. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118, 9 (March 2021).
[11] Federico Cinus, Marco Minici, Corrado Monti, and Francesco Bonchi. 2022. The
effect of people recommenders on echo chambers and polarization. In Proceedings
of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, Vol. 16. 90–101.
[12] Wesley Cota, Silvio C Ferreira, Romualdo Pastor-Satorras, and Michele Starnini.
2019. Quantifying echo chamber effects in information spreading over political
communication networks. EPJ Data Science 8, 1 (Dec. 2019), 1–13.
[13] Michela Del Vicario, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Fabio Petroni, Antonio
Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H. Eugene Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi. 2016. The
spreading of misinformation online. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 113, 3 (Jan 2016), 554–559.
[14] Nicholas Diakopoulos, Jack Bandy, and Henry Dambanemuya. 2021. Auditing
Human-Machine Communication Systems Using Simulated Humans. (Aug. 2021).
[15] Elizabeth Dubois and Grant Blank. 2018. The echo chamber is overstated: The
moderating effect of political interest and diverse media. Inf. Commun. Soc. 21, 5
(May 2018), 729–745.
[16] Antonio Ferrara, Lisette Espin-Noboa, Fariba Karimi, and Claudia Wagner. 2022.
Link recommendations: Their impact on network structure and minorities. In
Proceedings of the 14th ACM Web Science Conference 2022 (Barcelona, Spain)
(WebSci ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 228–
238.
[17] Seth Flaxman, Sharad Goel, and Justin M. Rao. 2016. Filter Bubbles, Echo Cham-
bers, and Online News Consumption. Public opinion quarterly 80, S1 (Mar 2016),
298–320.
[18] Kiran Garimella, Gianmarco De Francisci Morales, Aristides Gionis, and Michael
Mathioudakis. 2018. Political Discourse on Social Media: Echo Chambers, Gate-
keepers, and the Price of Bipartisanship. In Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide
Web Conference (WWW ’18). International World Wide Web Conferences Steering
Committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva, CHE, 913–922.
[19] Venkata Rama Kiran Garimella and Ingmar Weber. 2017. A Long-Term Analysis
of Polarization on Twitter. ICWSM 11, 1 (May 2017), 528–531.
[20] R. Kelly Garrett. 2009. Echo chambers online?: Politically motivated selective ex-
posure among Internet news users. Journal of computer-mediated communication:
JCMC 14, 2 (Jan 2009), 265–285.
[21] Brandi Geurkink. 2023.
Twitter’s Open Source Algorithm Is a Red Her-
ring. https://www.wired.com/story/twitters-open-source-algorithm-is-a-red-
herring/. Wired (7 April 2023).
[22] Andrew Guess, Benjamin Lyons, Brendan Nyhan, and Jason Reifler. 2018. Avoid-
ing the echo chamber about echo chambers: Why selective exposure to like-
minded political news is less prevalent than you think. (Jan. 2018).
[23] Muhammad Haroon, Anshuman Chhabra, Xin Liu, Prasant Mohapatra, Zubair
Shafiq, and Magdalena Wojcieszak. 2022. YouTube, The Great Radicalizer? Au-
diting and Mitigating Ideological Biases in YouTube Recommendations. (March
2022). arXiv:2203.10666 [cs.CY]
[24] Homa Hosseinmardi, Amir Ghasemian, Aaron Clauset, Markus Mobius, David M
Rothschild, and Duncan J Watts. 2021. Examining the consumption of radical
content on YouTube. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, 32
(2021), e2101967118.
[25] Eslam Hussein, Prerna Juneja, and Tanushree Mitra. 2020. Measuring Misin-
formation in Video Search Platforms: An Audit Study on YouTube. Proc. ACM
Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4, CSCW1 (May 2020), 1–27.
[26] Ian Kennedy, Morgan Wack, Andrew Beers, Joseph S Schafer, Isabella Garcia-
Camargo, Emma S Spiro, and Kate Starbird. 2022. Repeat Spreaders and Election
Delegitimization: A Comprehensive Dataset of Misinformation Tweets from the
2020 US Election. Journal of Quantitative Description: Digital Media 2 (2022).
[27] David Krackhardt and Robert N Stern. 1988. Informal networks and organiza-
tional crises: An experimental simulation. Social psychology quarterly (1988),
123–140.
[28] Emily Kubin and Christian von Sikorski. 2021. The role of (social) media in polit-
ical polarization: a systematic review. Annals of the International Communication
Association 45, 3 (July 2021), 188–206.
[29] Jae Kook Lee, Jihyang Choi, Cheonsoo Kim, and Yonghwan Kim. 2014. Social
Media, Network Heterogeneity, and Opinion Polarization. J. Commun. 64, 4 (Aug.
2014), 702–722.
[30] Sun Kyong Lee, Juhyung Sun, Seulki Jang, and Shane Connelly. 2022. Misinfor-
mation of COVID-19 vaccines and vaccine hesitancy. Scientific reports 12, 1 (Aug
2022), 13681.
10


Echo Chambers in the Age of Algorithms: An Audit of Twitter’s Friend Recommender System
Websci ’24, May 21–24, 2024, Stuttgart, Germany
[31] Colleen McClain, Regina Widjaya, Gonzalo Rivero, and Aaron Smith. 2021. The
behaviors and attitudes of US adults on Twitter. (2021).
[32] Dimitar Nikolov, Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. 2021. Right and
left, partisanship predicts (asymmetric) vulnerability to misinformation. Harvard
Kennedy School Misinformation Review (Feb 2021). https://doi.org/10.37016/mr-
2020-55
[33] Dimitar Nikolov, Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. 2021. Right and
left, partisanship predicts (asymmetric) vulnerability to misinformation. HKS
Misinfo Review (Feb. 2021).
[34] Caroline Mimbs Nyce. 2023. The New ‘Transparent’ Twitter Isn’t Very Trans-
parent. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2023/04/elon-musk-
twitter-algorithm-code-public/673642/. The Atlantic (5 April 2023).
[35] Kostantinos Papadamou, Savvas Zannettou, Jeremy Blackburn, Emiliano De
Cristofaro, Gianluca Stringhini, and Michael Sirivianos. 2022. “it is just a flu”:
Assessing the effect of watch history on YouTube’s pseudoscientific video recom-
mendations. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media 16 (May 2022), 723–734.
[36] Eli Pariser. 2011. The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you. penguin
UK.
[37] Pew Research Center. 2017.
The Future of Truth and Misinformation On-
line.
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2017/10/19/the-future-of-truth-
and-misinformation-online/
[38] Pew Research Center. 2022. Social Media and News Fact Sheet. https://www.
pewresearch.org/journalism/fact-sheet/social-media-and-news-fact-sheet/
[39] Manoel Horta Ribeiro, Veniamin Veselovsky, and Robert West. 2023. The Ampli-
fication Paradox in Recommender Systems. (Feb. 2023). arXiv:2302.11225 [cs.CY]
[40] Deana A Rohlinger, Kyle Rose, Sarah Warren, and Stuart Shulman. 2023. Does
the Musk Twitter Takeover Matter? Political Influencers, Their Arguments, and
the Quality of Information They Share. Socius 9 (Jan. 2023), 23780231231152193.
[41] Gabriel R. Sanchez and Keesha Middlemass. 2022.
Misinformation is
eroding the public’s confidence in democracy.
Brookings Institute (Jul
2022).
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/misinformation-is-eroding-the-
publics-confidence-in-democracy/
[42] Christian Sandvig, Kevin Hamilton, Karrie Karahalios, and Cedric Langbort. 2014.
Auditing algorithms: Research methods for detecting discrimination on internet
platforms. Data and discrimination: converting critical concerns into productive
inquiry 22, 2014 (2014), 4349–4357.
[43] Fernando P Santos, Yphtach Lelkes, and Simon A Levin. 2021. Link recommen-
dation algorithms and dynamics of polarization in online social networks. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118, 50 (Dec. 2021).
[44] Joseph S Schafer, Kayla Duskin, Morgan Wack, Anna Beers, Lia Bozarth, Tay-
lor Agajanian, Mike Caulfield, Emma S Spiro, and Kate Starbird. 2024. Elec-
tionRumors2022: A dataset of election rumors on Twitter during the 2022 US
midterms.
[45] Jessica Su, Aneesh Sharma, and Sharad Goel. 2016. The Effect of Recommenda-
tions on Network Structure. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on
World Wide Web (Montréal, Québec, Canada) (WWW ’16). International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva,
CHE, 1157–1167.
[46] Cass R. Sunstein. 2002. The law of group polarization. The journal of political
philosophy 10, 2 (Jun 2002), 175–195.
[47] Ludovic Terren and Rosa Borge-Bravo. 2021. Echo Chambers on Social Media: A
Systematic Review of the Literature. RCR 9 (March 2021), 99–118.
[48] Antonela Tommasel and Filippo Menczer. 2022. Do Recommender Systems Make
Social Media More Susceptible to Misinformation Spreaders?. In Proceedings of
the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (Seattle, WA, USA) (RecSys
’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 550–555.
11
